>> Awakening to our highest
human potential is no longer
about competition, but
about surviving and thriving
together.
Let's explore what human
potential looks like
on a global scale.
Welcome back to "Limitless."
Today we're talking
about the big picture.
And Julianna Margulies
said, "Small gestures
can have a big impact."
Well, I don't think we can
put that into words as good
as we can put that into images.
There's this YouTube video
titled "Orangutan Tries
to Fight Bulldozer."
It was an orangutan fighting
off a bulldozer that
was destroying its habitat.
Since 1978, we have
effectively, as a species,
destroyed nearly 300,000 square
miles of the Amazon rainforest
alone, one of the most important
biologically diverse ecosystems
on the planet.
That's about the size of
Malaysia and Sweden combined,
or the entire country
of Argentina combined,
just from the Amazon
rainforest alone.
75% of genetic diversity
in agricultural crops
have been lost, meaning
that we are not eating,
smelling, tasting,
or even living
amongst the biodiversity,
the wild nature
that our ancestors once did.
There is another
statistic saying
that 70% of all
life on this planet
will go extinct if the
global temperature rises
by 3.5 degrees Celsius.
Here's just a few more facts
about what humans as a species
are doing on this planet.
18 million acres of
deforestation a year--
land that's filled with wildlife
an important diversity--
is being destroyed
by human activities.
8 million tons of garbage
is dumped into the oceans
each year.
A quarter of coral
reefs are damaged
beyond repair, which are home
to a quarter of aquatic life.
So what this is really saying
is that since humans have come
online, if you will-- modern
humans walking this Earth--
in that 150,000
to 200,000 years,
it has only been in a
fraction of 1% of that time
that we've created over 99%
of the ecological destruction
that we see today.
Put another way, in
the past 25 years,
we have destroyed 1/10 of the
wilderness on this planet.
How long can we
survive this trend?
Is it going to keep
going in this direction?
There's some big
questions we need
to ask ourselves as a species.
What are we doing here?
Why are we doing things the
way that we are doing them?
Well, let's take a look at
this show called "Well-Being"
interviewing Dr. David Hufford
in an episode called "Mysticism
and Religious Beliefs."
>> How we got here--
you can look at that in
a lot of different ways,
but the primary way
has been the discovery
of cheap energy
sources coming from
outside our natural systems.
So that's primarily
fossil fuels.
Prior to that, the
only people who
could managed to live a truly
unhealthy life of the kind
that we have now
we're very rich people
who could concentrate the
labor of a lot of serfs,
or enslaved people.
They could eat white
bread and kill themselves
on lots of meat every day.
Of course, the
rest of the society
was also suffering, but
in the other direction.
They didn't suffer from the
effect of refined flour.
They suffered from the
effects of starvation.
So I don't have a romantic
view of that time.
But when you get into
the industrialization
and the discovery
of fossil fuels,
there's an ecological
principle that when
you add a great deal
of energy from outside
into a living system,
you change the balance.
You change the homeostasis
of that system.
And if you look at what happens
in most natural systems,
it's not a change that most
things living in that system
can even survive.
So we're living on a planet
where one tiny little effect
can ripple out through
many different systems.
This could be seen as
the butterfly effect.
The flapping of a butterfly's
wings on the prairie in the US
could affect a typhoon on
the other side of the planet.
There's actually a theory--
dynamic systems theory-- meaning
the little things do add up.
And they affect our lives and
the lives of others in ways
that maybe we can't
conceive of because these
are dynamic systems changing
in very unique ways.
In fact, a single human being
is a very dynamic system.
Think of the trillions
of cells that we
have in our body that
are our own, and then
the trillions of cells that we
have in our body that are not
our own--
the bacterial and fungal cells.
Think of all the different
operating systems
and all the
communication methods
that they have
between each other.
This isn't even taking
into consideration
all the environmental
impacts upon our decision
making and who and what we are.
So one human being is a
very, very dynamic system.
So then explode this out.
We're talking about the entire
species, the big picture--
So roughly 7 billion
people on this planet.
It's got to be mind-boggling how
dynamic that system truly is.
If one human being is so
dynamic, what about 7 billion?
Can we even wrap
our heads around it?
Well, according to dynamic
systems theory, yes.
In fact, macroscopic
dynamic systems
are easier to predict
than microscopic.
Take, for instance, the seasons.
You pretty much know when summer
is going to turn into autumn,
autumn will turn into winter,
and winter into spring.
But you can never
really tell what
the weather is going to
be like three years, three
months, three days, and
three hours from now.
What about in a child?
In child development,
you can pretty much
guess when their brain
will be fully developed,
when they will hit puberty,
and when they'll hit 21.
But you cannot tell what kind
of a behavior a child will bring
to a specific day
many years from now.
So it actually seems
like we can predict
large-scale dynamic
systems more than we
can the smaller scale or the
microscopic dynamic systems.
Today we're living in a
very interconnected society.
Thanks to the internet, we
can share ideas in real time
across the globe
in high definition.
It's almost like
the Tower of Babel,
one singular language,
because truly,
any idea, concept,
or web page can
be translated
instantaneously so we can all
speak this universal language.
Ideas, concepts, things that
are very radical and very new
can be shared instantaneously
like never before in history
thanks to the internet.
R. Buckminster Fuller
noted that there's
this knowledge-doubling curve
that seems to happen over time.
Over time, we double our
universal or global knowledge.
Let's say all the
way down to 1900s,
it was once every 100 years.
But nowadays, we've
hit that bell curve.
And what that means is we are
roughly doubling our knowledge
every 13 hours.
Almost twice a day, we're
doubling our knowledge,
when all the way up into 1900,
it would take a century for us
to get to that point.
That's truly incredible.
And because of this, because of
all the amazing technological
advancements-- the compounding
of intelligence in our society
and in our global
state of affairs--
we have the technology
for me to be speaking now
and you later to have me in
the comfort of your own home
at your own convenience
on your computer screen
speaking to you.
Our human potential here
with this technology is huge.
But all this advance
in technology--
it's doubling itself so
rapidly that we really
need to bring in a sustainable
and healthy direction for all
of it to be working towards.
So let's take a look at
how some of the experts
think about this.
In a film called "Art Meets
Science and Spirituality
in a Changing Economy."
>> I'll be talking about
global interdependence,
global partnership, or I'll
be talking about global
exploitation.
And most economic policies and
most business policies today,
as we know, are more
in the direction
of global exploitation
than global partnership.
So there needs to
be a shift in values
together with the
shift in thinking.
If the thinking shifts
to global awareness
with the purpose of
exploiting the natural world
and the peoples of the
world as it is today,
then globalization is a curse.
But if it shifts to the
values of global partnership
and global interdependence,
then it's a blessing.
But growth in the living world
doesn't mean just expansion.
It means, say, in a human
being, development to maturity.
It means also "inner growth."
so growth needs to be qualified.
So Exxon made a huge
profit from that oil spill.
The GNP of Alaska rose
sharply after the oil spill.
But that's not
sustainable growth.
That's destructive growth.
>> In my humble opinion, the
best way to reach the most
amount of people and truly
influence their way of life,
their value systems, the way
they look at the world is
through art.
All the different
mediums of art forms
can truly impact people's lives.
In fact, thanks to
technology, if it's digital,
you can replicate it an
infinite amount of times.
And that's how many
people you can reach.
Now that's real human potential.
Let me give an example.
Former President Barack
Obama, in his time in office,
authored three books.
And in those three books,
he sold roughly four million
copies.
Now let's take it to
a no-named artist.
He put out a piece of
work called "Zeitgeist,"
anonymous free online,
and it instantly
started getting 20
million views a month.
This no-named artist who
now we know as Peter Joseph,
made a piece of art
that was reaching
roughly 100 million people
in less than half a year.
This means you don't
have to be the president
to truly change the world.
So this was beautiful
because what
it felt like to the audience, at
least what it felt like to me,
was very authentic.
He wasn't saying, stop.
First, we need to take
care of some money.
Or first, you need
to know my name.
He didn't seem like he was
actually looking for anything.
He just wanted us to wake up.
Joan Cooney said "There is a
young and impressionable mind
out there that is
hungry for information.
It is latched onto an electronic
tube as its main source
of nourishment."
So the question that
we have to start
asking ourselves is, what
kind of information, ideas,
and concepts are we
feeding our youth?
And what's that going to
do to these generations
as they grow up into
our future society?
Let's take a look at a beautiful
film called "Discover the Gift"
right here on Gaia.
>> And now realizing that I
do have an extraordinary gift,
I want to share it.
I want to make a difference.
We're guided not
by the work, but we
were guided by our heart.
We're guided by our
soul's desire to unfold.
>> We all have very
different abilities.
We have very different talents.
We have very different gifts.
And most school systems are
designed to ignore them.
But the problem is with
the education system
is that it's a system.
And it's a system that's
based on the principles
of manufacturing
and industrialism.
The idea is if you
keep with the program
and you do everything
that's required of your,
you'll pop out the far end,
and you'll be qualified.
And you can carry on
and lead a life that
will be profitable and secure.
And none of that is true.
And it's not true because
human life is not linear.
Human life is organic.
And human life is
not standardized,
and it's not conformist.
It's diverse and extraordinarily
rich and various.
But for all kinds of
reasons, not least
of which is education,
we're socialized
into thinking that
certain types of ability
are more important than
all other sorts of ability.
And it's why so
many people think
they don't have any-- because
they don't discover them.
>> So that's the impact.
That's what we're
doing with our youth.
When we teach them
things, we tell them
about who and what they are.
We have categories for them
to fit themselves into.
And if you don't fit,
sorry about your luck.
That's at least the way it
feels to most people going
through the educational system.
But what does it
mean to educate?
If you look at the original
root word "educare,"
it actually means to lead
out or to draw out the innate
capacities of man, meaning
that learning is really just
the drawing out of
our innate knowledge--
things that we already know--
so we can step into
our power more.
This is truly what
education could be--
teaching children how to
think, how to critically
think, how to use the tools that
they already have inside them
rather than what to think.
At times, it feels like
the educational system
is molding and crafting our
youth to fit into a society
that we already have going--
a structure, an
economic, a societal,
a cultural system that's already
running, meaning these children
are turning into cogs
to run that machine.
It's just a way of saying--
it may or may not be true.
It's up to you.
Here's what that same
gentleman, Peter Joseph,
has to say in a book of his
called "The New Human Rights."
"Efficiency, abundance,
and sustainability
are enemies of our
economic structure,
for they are inverse to
the mechanisms required
to perpetuate consumption,"
meaning the system today
is not meant for
efficiency and abundance.
One of the things he
brings up in this book
is planned obsolescence
with technology
because if one
piece of technology
could last us a lifetime,
then we'll only buy one--
not so good for their profits.
So there's planned
obsolescence, where
you have this phone or this
tablet or this computer
and it'll truly only
last you a few years.
And this is the point.
It may not break
down structurally.
It just may not work with
the new software and all
the updates that are happening.
Now Peter Joseph
goes on to say, "You
begin to see that the one
billion people currently
starving on this planet, the
endless slums of the poor,
and all the horrors of a culture
due to poverty and depravity
are not natural phenomena due
to some natural human order
or lack of earthly resources.
Rather, they are products of
the creation, perpetuation,
and preservation of artificial
scarcity and inefficiency."
So if that is true
even to a small degree,
then we really need to take a
look at the bigger picture--
the system that we conform to--
because there are
always outliers,
there are always outcasts, there
are always the Peter Josephs
showing these little flaws.
And that doesn't mean that
we need to throw away society
as it is, but it
does mean there are
real updates, real
corrections that
need to be made for us to
step into our full potential
as a species.
So there actually
is a prophecy--
a Hopi prophecy inscripted onto
a sandstone cliff in Arizona.
This very time that
we are living in--
right here, right now--
all the topsy-turvy and
unpredictable nature
of what's going on this
planet might be inscribed
in this old petroglyph.
So I'm going to hand
it over to Gregg Braden
because he's actually
spoken with the elders
and asked them what
this petroglyphs truly
means about this
time we're living
in an episode of "Missing Links"
titled, "Ensuring Humanity's
Continuation."
>> We are now living this moment
in the map of time the point
of no return that,
while in the past,
it's always been possible
to choose between the upper
and the lower path--
and truthfully, we
can always choose.
From 1998 on, it becomes much
more difficult to choose.
And on the lower
path, what you see
are three circles that
straddle this lower path.
The first one on
the left is what
the Hopi call "the first
great shaking of the Earth."
They said between the time of
the last 5,000-year cycle--
beginning and when it end--
the people of the Earth
will go through these three
great shakings.
And the first shaking they
say is the First World War.
It's already happened.
The second shaking you
see right next to that--
you probably can guess--
is the Second World War.
Then we see the vertical
line-- the point of no return.
And to the right of 1998, we
see the third great shaking.
And on this image-- it's
a little bit different
perspective--
you can see where the upper path
ends abruptly and goes nowhere.
You can also see-- and this is
where the elder has traced out
the images with the chalk.
The lower image--
it reaches a corner
which is the edge of the
rock, but it doesn't stop.
It continues.
It goes around that
edge, and it keeps going.
They tell us that that edge
is our time of extremes.
That edge is where
we are right now
and that the path that will
carry us gracefully and allow
us to thrive with food into
advanced age across that path
is the lower path.
The qualities of both of
these paths-- the upper path--
he said the people that
walked the upper path--
they live in the world of
comfort, greed, and profit.
He said, this is
the kind of profit
where one person or
a group of people
benefit at the expense and
the suffering of another.
Whenever we do better at the
expense of someone else hurting
or doing worse, that's
the kind of profit
that is on the path
that leads nowhere.
It's the path that
ends abruptly.
It's a path that cannot possibly
carry us through our time
of extremes because it is
not a sustainable path.
And I said, well, what is
this lower path all about?
What are the qualities
of the lower path?
The lower path, and probably
as no surprise to you,
is based upon a different
kind of quality--
love, strength, and balance--
love, strength, and balance.
And if you look closely at
each of these qualities,
what you'll find is that
comfort, greed, profit--
Those are things that
we do in the world.
Love, strength, and balance--
those are things that
we become in our lives.
>> So why a show about
human potential am I ending
on the global state of affairs?
Well, truthfully, it's because
this is a dynamic system.
This whole planet
is truly dynamic.
In fact, this dynamic
system of the planet
fits into an even more dynamic
system of the entire universe.
This entire universe
is our extended body.
We are entangled
with it somehow.
If there truly was a big bang,
then we are entangled with all
that there is, meaning
we can influence somehow.
We can tap into it,
we can change it,
and we can change
the direction of it.
This is important because this
is saying that you are not just
you.
You are not the flesh
and blood that you
see before you in the mirror.
You are the total impact you
have upon the world and others.
See how we do influence
the world around us.
This is how we will truly get
to our deepest human potential--
the real purpose as to why
we're here on this planet.
The question is, are
we mining that resource
of our human potential so we
can truly bring some good down
here?
So this is what I'm asking you--
to go be who you're
meant to be; go seek who
and what that might be; what
your purpose, what your plan,
what your path is
on this planet.
Ask those relevant questions,
and listen for the responses.
Be honest with yourself.
And remember, the root
of the word "question"
is "quest" because every time
you have a question in mind,
when it's no longer an answer,
and it's not all figured out,
and it becomes something
that you have to ponder,
then we have the quest
after that answer.
And what we'll find as we
peer deep through the darkness
is ourselves staring back at us.
This is unity.
This is what we're
working towards.
This is our highest and
truest human potential.
I'll leave you with a quote from
Carl Sagan that I believe sums
it up better than I ever could.
"Who are we, if not measured
by our impact on others?
That's who we are.
We are not who we say we are.
We're not who we want to be.
We are sum of the influence
and impact that we have
in our lives and on others."
Walk soft, live light,
let go, but hold tight.
This is truly a long
roller coaster of soul
that we are all on until
the clock ticks last for us.
And I hope you find what you're
looking for before that time.
I want to thank you all
very deeply for joining me
on this very first
series of "Limitless--
Unlocking Your
Hidden Potential."
It's very near and
dear to my heart,
and I hope you took it that way.
I hope you can take some
of these lessons deeply
into your life and
share it with others.
And I'll see you
on the other side.